---
report_date: 2026-06-29
flash_source: un
killed: 4
killed_children: 1
injured: 20
settler_attacks: 37
---
https://www.ochaopt.org/content/humanitarian-situation-report-3-july-2026#west-bank

Between 23 and 29 June (hereinafter the reporting period), Israeli forces shot and killed three Palestinians, including one child, during raids and search operations in Salfit, Ramallah and Jenin governorates. Israeli forces withheld the bodies of two of those killed. In addition, Israeli authorities confirmed the death of one Palestinian who had been injured during an Israeli airstrike in Tubas governorate in December 2024 and subsequently died while in Israeli custody. During the same period, about 20 Palestinians were injured, including 16 by Israeli settlers and four by Israeli forces. No Israeli casualties were reported.



This brings the total number of Palestinians killed by Israeli forces or settlers in the West Bank in 2026 to 63, including 15 children, and the number of Palestinians killed since 7 October 2023 to 1,109 Palestinians, including 243 children.



During the reporting period, at least 37 settler attacks resulting in casualties, property damage, or both were documented. A notable feature of the attacks documented during the reporting period was the repeated targeting of essential civilian infrastructure and livelihood assets, including electricity networks, water infrastructure, irrigation systems, agricultural structures and farmland. These attacks further undermined access to basic services and agricultural livelihoods in communities already affected by recurrent settler violence, while reflecting mounting pressure on Palestinian herding and farming communities through repeated intimidation, damage to productive assets and worsening restrictions on access to agricultural land and grazing areas.
